Draft: STMViewer article (#384)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/STMViewer.md

---
# This is a template for Interrupt posts. Use previous, more recent posts from the _posts/
# directory for more inspiration and patterns.
#
# When submitting a post for publishing, submit a PR with the post in the _drafts/ directory
# and it will be moved to _posts/ on the date of publish.
#
# e.g.
# $ cp _drafts/_template.md _drafts/my_post.md
#
# It will now show up in the front page when running Jekyll locally.

> title: Visualizing embedded data made easy

Reviewer: I think the title should probably have a mention of STMViewer. Maybe something like:

```
Visualizing Realtime Data With STMViewer
```

description: 
    "A brief introduction to STMViewer software use cases in debugging embedded targets"
author: piotrw
---

<!-- excerpt start -->

If you've ever wanted to plot data acquired on your embedded target, this article is for you. It explores common use cases for real-time data visualization using STMViewer. Say goodbye to manual, time-consuming, and error-prone data collection and display methods to speed up your debugging process.

<!-- excerpt end -->

{% include newsletter.html %}

{% include toc.html %}

> ## What exactly can it visualize?

Reviewer: I think it might be helpful to walk through why someone would want to do this. What kind of problem would it help you solve? Right now we have a good look at some tools, but the motivation is unclear.

STMViewer consists of two modules which serve a slightly different purpose: 

1. Variable Viewer - a module that reads variables' values directly from RAM using ST-Link SWD (only SWDIO, SWCLK, and GND connection is needed). It is asynchronous, which means it samples the memory with the time period set on the PC. It is completely non-intrusive and can log many variables at once. There are some trade-offs though. The first one is that logged variables' addresses have to be constant, meaning they have to be globals. Moreover, with more aggressive optimization some of the variables may get optimized and fail to be logged.

> 2. Trace Viewer - a module that reads and parses SWO (Serial Wire Viewer) data using an ST-Link. To use it, you need to connect SWDIO, SWCLK, SWO, and GND. This tool operates synchronously, meaning it visualizes data points at the rate they are produced on the target. A data point can be either a special single-byte flag used to create digital plots or any value that fits within up to 4 bytes, as in the case of 'analog' plots. It incurs minimal performance overhead, involving just a single register write per plot point, as serialization and timestamping are handled by the ITM peripheral. Trace Viewer can be employed for profiling specific parts of the codebase or visualizing signals that are too fast for the asynchronous Variable Viewer. Its main limitations are the maximum allowed SWO pin baudrate of the ST-Link and the fact that the ITM peripheral is supported only on Cortex M3/M4/M7/M33 cores. 

Reviewer: Wondering if these would flow better as sections like `### Variable Viewer`. As it stands they're both a bit long for a numbered list.

## I'm already using STMStudio/CubeMonitor, why create a new tool?

Let's begin with the most commonly asked question: Why bother creating a tool when existing options are provided by ST? There are several reasons:

> 1. STMStudio is deprecated, and while it was a useful tool, it became challenging to work with due to persistent bugs. It also lacks support for mangled C++ names and is exclusively available for Windows.

Reviewer: Again feels like these are a bit too long to be in a list. Wondering if these would just do better as individual sections, or just unlabeled paragraphs.

3. Last but not least, none of the available hobby-level software tools include a trace data visualizer. In my opinion, STMViewer's trace data visualizer is the most intriguing module, enabling users to visualize variables synchronously and profile functions or interrupts within minutes.

## Variable Viewer

<!-- TODO GIF ? -->

As mentioned earlier, Variable Viewer is an asynchronous module that samples values from predefined RAM addresses on your target. It can be particularly useful when you want to visualize multiple, relatively slow signals (with a maximum sampling rate of around 1 kHz). The RAM addresses are read from the project's *.elf file, which is parsed using GDB. This is essentially the same approach used by STMStudio and CubeMonitor. 

For a quick start please refer to: [Variable Viewer](https://github.com/klonyyy/STMViewer#variable-viewer-1)

### PID controller

> Let's see it in action on a step response of a classic cascaded PID from a servo drive:

Reviewer: Is the source for this available anywhere?

Author: I can prepare a simplified PID implementation that was used for both controllers, but apart from that I think it would be too much to describe in a single usage example.

> Let's see it in action on a step response of a classic cascaded PID from a servo drive:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see Variable Viewer in action on a step response of a classic cascaded PID from a servo drive:
```

![](/img/stmviewer/memcpy.png)

After logging, you can use the markers to determine the time difference between points. It appears that copying a single byte takes about 270 ns, whereas copying 577 bytes takes approximately 25.35 us at 160 MHz.

### Profiling multiple interrupts

This example is going to be a bit similar to the previous one, except we will use multiple channels and try to observe lower-priority interrupts being preempted by higher-priority ones.

I've configured three timers and set their interrupt priorities as follows: 0 (highest logical priority) for TIM7, 1 for TIM17, and 2 (lowest) for TIM6. I've included some dummy instructions in each interrupt to simulate some work being done.

<!-- TODO PICTURE INTERRUPTS -->
![](/img/stmviewer/interrupts.png)

We can observe how the highest priority execution halts all other interrupts, and only after it completes do the other interrupts resume. What's particularly significant in such experiments is that the marker register writes used in Trace Viewer are atomic, preventing a higher-priority interrupt from occurring between data point generation. This also makes it a valuable tool for visualizing FreeRTOS threads. 

> ### Fast ADC signal

Reviewer: Maybe replace `Fast` with high `high frequency` throughout?

## I'm already using STMStudio/CubeMonitor, why create a new tool?

Let's begin with the most commonly asked question: Why bother creating a tool when existing options are provided by ST? There are several reasons:

STMStudio is deprecated, and while it was a useful tool, it became challenging to work with due to persistent bugs. It also lacks support for mangled C++ names and is exclusively available for Windows.

CubeMonitor, on the other hand, is often considered too much overhead for debugging purposes. It's primarily designed for creating dashboards, and during debugging, the focus tends to be on functionality rather than aesthetics. Manipulating plot data and writing values to logged variables can be inconvenient. Furthermore, setting up a basic logger configuration can require some time to become familiar with NodeRED's setup.

Last but not least, none of the available hobby-level software tools include a trace data visualizer. In my opinion, STMViewer's trace data visualizer is the most intriguing module, enabling users to visualize variables synchronously and profile functions or interrupts within minutes.

## Variable Viewer

> <!-- TODO GIF ? -->

Reviewer 2: Hi Piotr! Did you intend to add gif or images in these `TODO`s? If not, could you remove these `TODO` comments?

Author: Hello! You're right, I forgot to remove these comments. It should be ok now. I added the GIF's, but I'm not sure if they aren't too much, when we consider the text-to-images ratio. Please let me know if I should keep or remove them. Is there an option to make the images clickable to zoom them? I get the impression that the position_PID image I've changed is still not readable, and the same goes for the GIFs. They are fine when zoomed in, so it's not a matter of poor resolution.
